<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
 
<!DOCTYPE reference PUBLIC "-//OASIS//DTD DITA Reference//EN"
 "../dtd/reference.dtd">
<!-- 
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to You under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at  

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0  

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software  
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,  
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.  
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and  
limitations under the License.
-->
<reference id="rrefsqljcreateaggregate" xml:lang="en-us">
<title>CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE statement</title>
<prolog><metadata>
<keywords><indexterm>CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE statement</indexterm>
<indexterm>SQL statements<indexterm>CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE</indexterm></indexterm>
<indexterm>user-defined aggregates<indexterm>creating</indexterm></indexterm>
<indexterm>aggregates<indexterm>user-defined</indexterm></indexterm>
</keywords>
</metadata></prolog>
<refbody>
<section><p>The CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE statement creates a user-defined
aggregate (UDA). A UDA is a custom aggregate operator.</p></section>
<refsyn><title>Syntax</title>
<codeblock><b>CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE [ <i><xref 
href="rrefschemaname.dita#rrefschemaname">schemaName</xref>.</i> ] <i><xref
href="crefsqlj34834.dita#crefsqlj34834">SQL92Identifier</xref></i>
FOR <i>ValueDataType</i>
[ RETURNS <i>ReturnDataType</i> ]
EXTERNAL NAME <i>ClassNameString</i></b></codeblock>
<p>The aggregate name is composed of an optional <i>schemaName</i> and a
<i>SQL92Identifier</i>. If a <i>schemaName</i> is not provided, the current
schema is the default schema. If a qualified aggregate name is specified, the
schema name cannot begin with SYS.</p>
<p>In general, UDAs live in the same namespace as one-argument user-defined
functions (see
<xref href="rrefcreatefunctionstatement.dita#rrefcreatefunctionstatement"></xref>).
A schema-qualified UDA name may not be the schema-qualified name of a
one-argument user-defined function.</p>
<p>An unqualified UDA name may not be the name of an aggregate defined in
part 2 of the SQL Standard, section 10.9:</p>
<codeblock>ANY
AVG
COLLECT
COUNT
EVERY
FUSION
INTERSECTION
MAX
MIN
SOME
STDDEV_POP
STDDEV_SAMP
SUM
VAR_POP
VAR_SAMP</codeblock>
<p>In addition, an unqualified UDA name may not be the name of any of the
<ph conref="../conrefs.dita#prod/productshortname"></ph> built-in functions
which take one argument.</p>
<p>The <i>ValueDataType</i> can be any valid nullable
<ph conref="../conrefs.dita#prod/productshortname"></ph> data type except for
XML, including user-defined types.</p>
<p>The <i>ReturnDataType</i> can be any valid nullable
<ph conref="../conrefs.dita#prod/productshortname"></ph> data type except for
XML. If the <i>ReturnDataType</i> is omitted, it defaults to be the same as
<i>ValueDataType</i>.</p>
<p>The <i>ClassNameString</i> is a single-quoted string. It is the full name of
a Java class which implements the <i>org.apache.derby.agg.Aggregator</i>
interface. That contract is not checked until a statement is compiled which
invokes the UDA.</p>
<p>The owner of the schema where the UDA lives automatically gains the USAGE
privilege on the UDA and can grant this privilege to other users and roles. Only
the <xref href="rrefattrib26867.dita#rrefattrib26867">database owner</xref> and
the owner of the UDA can grant these USAGE privileges. The USAGE privilege
cannot be revoked from the schema owner. See
<xref href="rrefsqljgrant.dita#rrefsqljgrant"></xref> and
<xref href="rrefsqljrevoke.dita#rrefsqljrevoke"></xref> for more
information.</p>
</refsyn>
<example><title>Examples</title>
<codeblock><b>CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE mode FOR INT
EXTERNAL NAME 'com.example.myapp.aggs.Mode';

CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE types.maxPrice FOR PRICE
EXTERNAL NAME 'com.example.myapp.types.PriceMaxer';

CREATE DERBY AGGREGATE types.avgLength FOR VECTOR
RETURNS DOUBLE
EXTERNAL NAME 'com.example.myapp.types.VectorLength';</b></codeblock>
<p>See "Programming user-defined aggregates" in the
<ph conref="../conrefs.dita#pub/citdevelop"></ph> for more details about
creating and using user-defined aggregates.</p>
</example>
</refbody>
</reference>
